Prologue.
I did not set out to write a book, ever,
really. But this book grew within me,
from a question I could not stop asking,
and that question sprung from a season of
emptiness I had not expected.
I was raised in a Christian home, but the
faith I inherited was more like
furniture. It was just there. I did not
think about it much. By my late twenties
I had drifted far enough from it that the
distance no longer registered in any
practical way. What did register,
eventually, was an emptyness carved out
by the popular atheism I had wandered
into. The arguments were loud and
confident and dissapointingly incurious.
They attacked a God I did not recognise
from any serious theology I had
encountered, and they claimed the
authority of science while showing
remarkably little interest in where
science was actually uncertain. The
rhetoric was polished, to be sure. But
the substance was wafer thin. I remember
one evening, having just finished yet
another bestselling debunking of faith,
and thinking: if the case against God is
this easy, someone is not asking the
tough questions.
So I started asking them myself. Not as a
believer defending a position, but as
someone genuinely unsettled, willing to
follow the inquiry wherever it might
lead.
That inquiry has now lasted more than two
decades, and it has taken me through
terrain I never expected to cross. I
studied broadly at first: cosmology,
quantum mechanics, evolutionary biology,
the philosophy of mind. And I read the
primary sources as well as the popular
summaries, and whilst the popular
summaries kept telling me things were
settled, when the academic papers
indicated otherwise. I discovered, to my
surprise, that the confident materialism
I had absorbed from popular culture
rested on interpretive choices that were
far less secure than their public
presentation suggested. The science and
the data was indisputable, but the
framework built around it was one option
among several, and by no means the most
coherent one.
Two encounters changed the direction of
my thinking.
The first was a book about quantised
spacetime that I picked up in my early
forties. It was speculative, and some of
its claims did not survive closer
scrutiny. But buried in its pages was an
image that I could not shake: the idea
that space itself might be a medium, a
superfluid, and that what we call gravity
might be the behaviour of density
gradients within that medium rather than
a mysterious force reaching across empty
space. The picture was intuitive in a way
that no physics had been for me before. I
could *see* it. A massive object does not
pull things towards itself through some
invisible tether. It changes the density
of the medium around it, and nearby
objects respond to the gradient the way a
leaf responds to a current in a stream.
I was so moved by that idea that I went
looking for the serious physics behind
it. And I found it. Not in the
speculative book that had sparked the
question, but in the peer-reviewed work
of physicists like Grigory Volovik at
Aalto University, whose monograph *The
Universe in a Helium Droplet* showed that
a superfluid medium can reproduce the
structures of particle physics and
general relativity as emergent phenomena.
I found it in Kerson Huang's work at MIT,
extending superfluid cosmology into a
coherent mathematical framework. I found
it in Lasha Berezhiani and Justin
Khoury's superfluid dark matter programme
at the University of Pennsylvania, which
explained galactic rotation curves
without invisible particles. These were
not fringe thinkers. They were working
physicists, publishing in refereed
journals, building on decades of
condensed matter research that had
already earned Nobel Prizes.
The framework they described is called
the superfluid vacuum hypothesis. It
proposes, in essence, that the quantum
vacuum, the thing we loosely call "empty
space," behaves as a superfluid at
cosmological scales. If this is correct,
then the particles and forces we observe
are not fundamental ingredients of
reality but emergent patterns within that
deeper medium, the way vortices are not
separate from the water in which they
form.
The second encounter was with an
equation. Euler's identity:
e, to the power of i, times pie, plus
one, equals zero.
I had always known it as a piece of
mathematical elegance, a curiosity to
admire. But as I lived with the
superfluid picture and read more deeply
into the theology I had once set aside,
the equation began to look like something
else. Its five symbols, drawn from
completely unrelated branches of
mathematics, combined into a statement
that was not merely true but structurally
resonant with the oldest story I knew.
Three of those symbols — e, i, and pie —
encode growth, a hidden perpendicular
dimension, and the geometry of the
circle. Raised together as an exponent,
they trace a half-turn through the
complex plane and land on negative one: a
complete inversion. The equation then
adds one, and the result is zero. Not
emptiness — resolution.
I am not a mathematician by training, and
I will not pretend this is a proof of
anything. But I will say plainly what I
saw, and what this book will spend its
middle chapters carefully examining: the
structure of that equation maps, with
uncanny precision, onto the Christian
narrative of creation, fall, incarnation,
and restoration. Not as a metaphor or a
loose analogy, but as structural
correspondence, symbol by symbol,
operation by operation. The middle
chapters of this book exist to lay that
correspondence out in full, and I will
not rush through it here. But I knew, the
first time the picture came into focus,
that I was looking at something
breathtaking that I simply could not walk
away from.
I need to say something about that word
"maps" before we go any further, because
it carries the weight of the whole
project.
This book does not claim that Euler's
identity proves God exists. It does not
claim that physics demonstrates the truth
of Christianity. It does not claim that
the superfluid vacuum hypothesis is
established science. The hypothesis is a
serious research programme, pursued by
credible physicists and supported by a
growing body of experimental and
observational evidence, but it has not
yet achieved consensus. It may prove
correct in time or it may even prove
partly correct. It might also be
superseded by something altogether
different and better.
No. The claim of this book is
conditional, and I lean into that
conditionality as the intellectual
backbone of everything that follows:
**IF** the superfluid vacuum hypothesis
proves correct, **THEN** a striking set
of structural resonances emerge between
the physics of that medium and the
theological account of reality that the
Christian tradition has confessed for two
thousand years.
These resonances are not vague gestures
toward "isn't the universe amazing." They
are specific, detailed, and testable
assertions in the sense that the physics
underneath them will be confirmed or
disproven by future research. If the
physics fails, the resonances fall with
it. The theology though, grounded
independently in Scripture and the
historic confessions of the church will
remain. Nothing in this book asks the
reader to stake their faith on a physics
hypothesis. But everything in this book
asks the reader to consider what it would
mean if the deepest structure of the
physical world turned out to confess the
deepest claims of the Christian faith.
That is the question I could not eject.
It is the question that turned a drifting
ex-churchgoer into a person who reads
condensed matter physics papers, studies
Reformed theology alone and in groups,
and who spends time marking Bible studies
of men in prison and writing letters to
encourage them in their search for
meaning and absolution.
I should tell you what kind of book this
is, so you can decide whether to keep
walking with me. But first, let me make
clear what it is not.
This is not a book that attacks science.
I love science. I have spent the better
part of twenty years studying it with the
careful, sometimes obsessive attention of
someone who suspects it has something
extraordinary to say. This book
celebrates what science has revealed
while asking honest questions about what
it has not yet explained and about
whether the framework we use to interpret
the evidence is the only one available.
This is not a book about intelligent
design, at least not in the way that it
has been used in recent political and
educational controversies. I am not
arguing that certain biological
structures are too complex to have
evolved, or that gaps in our knowledge
are evidence for God. The argument here
is structural, not interventionist. It
concerns the deep architecture of
physical law, not the details of
biological history.
This is not a book of natural theology in
the classical sense either. I am not
claiming to prove God's existence from
the evidence of nature alone. The
Christian tradition has always held that
creation points beyond itself, and I
believe it does, but a pointer is not a
proof. The resonances I describe are
suggestive, detailed, and worth taking
seriously. But they are not
demonstrations.
And this is most certainly not a New Age
book. You will find no talk of
"vibrations" or "energy fields" or
"quantum consciousness" in the way those
phrases circulate in alternative wellness
culture. When this book discusses
vibrations, it names the governing
equations. When it discusses
consciousness, it draws hard boundaries
around what the physics can and cannot
say. Every physical claim in these pages
is tethered to peer-reviewed research,
and where the tether is long or
uncertain, it will be pointed out.
What this book *is*, I hope, is a
fireside conversation starter. I have
spent a long time in two worlds that most
people are told cannot speak to each
other: the world of physics and the world
of faith. I have found that they speak to
each other more fluently than either
side’s gatekeepers tend to admit. I want
to show you what I have seen, as plainly
and honestly as I can, and let you judge
for yourself whether the picture holds
together.
You do not need a physics degree to read
this book, I certainly don’t posess one.
And like me, you also do not need a
theology degree. You need only the
willingness to think carefully and the
patience to let unfamiliar ideas arrive
at their own pace. I will attempt to
explain every technical concept with no
assumption of prior knowledge, in plain
language and with the same care I would
use if we were sitting across a table and
you had asked me to tell you about the
strangest, most beautiful thing I had
ever found.
The journey ahead moves through five
parts.
The first, *Learning to Read the World*,
builds the tools you need to evaluate
scientific claims honestly. We begin with
the sky: how we measure cosmic distances,
what the evidence for the expansion of
the universe actually shows, where the
standard model's placeholders (dark
matter, dark energy, inflation) are
genuinely explanatory and where they are
terms for things we do not yet
understand. Then we come down to the
small: what quantum mechanics actually
claims, what a field is, what the vacuum
looks like when you examine it closely,
and why the language of waves, phase, and
rotation turns out to be the language in
which the physical world prefers to
speak. By the time we finish that
section, you will have what I think of as
a conscience about evidence, the ability
to tell when a claim is standing on solid
ground, when it is standing on a good
guess, and when it is standing on nothing
at all.
The second part, *A Deeper Architecture*,
introduces the superfluid vacuum
hypothesis properly. What does it mean to
say space is a medium? What is emergence,
and why does it matter? How does gravity
arise from density gradients instead of
mysterious forces? And why might this
particular medium, if it exists, be the
kind of thing a Creator would make? That
last question is where the physics
register gives way to the theological
register.
The third part, *The Equation*, is the
mathematical heart of the book. This is
where the argument is most original and
most vulnerable, and I hope to treat it
with appropriate care.
The fourth part, *Resonances and
Boundaries*, follows the implications
further than you might expect and then
draws hard lines around what the argument
can and cannot reach, because a book that
does not name its own limits has not
earned the right to make claims.
The fifth part, *The Invitation*, draws
the threads together. Not to agree with
me, necessarily. But to consider the
possibility that the cosmos is not a cold
accident, that its structure might be
saying something, and that what it says
might rhyme with the oldest confession
the church has made: that in the
beginning was the Word, and the Word was
with God, and the Word was God.
I write as a Reformed Christian. That
means I stand within a particular
tradition: the heritage of John Calvin,
the Belgic Confession, the Heidelberg
Catechism. I will try be honest about
where that tradition shapes my reading,
and I will use the broadest accurate
language I can, because most of what this
book describes belongs not to Reformed
theology specifically but to the shared
confession of Christians across two
millennia.
As I mentioned above, I write also as
someone who mentors men in prison. When a
man who has lost everything writes to ask
whether the universe has a purpose,
whether his life counts for something,
whether there is a God who sees him and
might forgive him, the question deserves
an answer that is honest about what we
know and what we do not. I have tried to
write a book that could be read in a
study group in that setting, with no
resources beyond the text and the
willingness to think.
If the language is too technical, I will
have failed. If the theology is too
academic, I will have failed. If the
wonder is not felt, I will have failed
worst of all.
This is a book about evidence, mystery,
and the place where they meet. It asks of
you the courage to ask *what if*, the
discipline to follow the answer carefully
and honestly, and the openness to
consider a unity of two worlds of
knowledge that might fill you with the
same reverence for the wonder of our
cosmos.
Let us begin.